[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> I am Raymond Moody.
And these are my thoughts
on visionary encounters
with the spirits of
departed loved ones.
It is a common human experience
after the death of a loved
one for people to have some
sort of significant message
from the departed person.
And there are several
variants of this.
Some people will say that in the
middle of the day when they're
in full waking
consciousness, the apparition
of the departed person will
just appear in their home.
Other people will say
that they experience
an apparition of the
deceased loved one
while they are lying in
bed on the verge of sleep.
Not asleep, but kind of
in that drifty situation.
They see the apparition standing
often at the foot of the bed.
And a third type in which
people will say that--
they have to call this a
dream, because it was--
they were asleep
when it occurred,
but that it didn't have
the quality of a dream.
It actually seemed
to be a visitation
with a departed loved one.
So those are the three
main ways of people
receiving communications
from dead relatives.
In our world, this
happens spontaneously.
But in the ancient
Greek and Roman worlds,
there were ways of actually
bringing these experiences
about.
So they had institutions
where people
would go to have
visionary encounters
with their departed loved ones.
Burial sites have been
found from 40,000 years
ago or longer, which showed
that even at that time,
people felt that there
was another world.
Now, so there's really no way of
putting a precise date on when
these things came about.
It seems to be part
of human nature.
But even then the earliest
writings that we have--
in the writings of the
Greek civilization,
for example, there are accounts
of people seeing apparitions
and so on.
It's part and parcel
of human nature.
In 1991, I saw my
deceased grandmother
as vividly as I have
seen any other person.
I felt her presence.
I heard her voice.
And to this day, I'm
still startled by that.
I mean, I can't
deny my experience.
It was completely real to me.
When people have an
apparition of the deceased,
one of the things that
they often describe
is how natural it seems.
I think if you're just
sitting abstractly and saying
that Aunt Ruth had a
visit from Aunt Jane
last night, that you would think
that that must be something
totally extraordinary and
out of the order of anything
we experience.
But what people say is, no,
this is completely natural.
The naturalness of it is one
thing that people experience.
And I can talk about that
from my own experience,
that I realized full well
that my grandmother was dead.
And I guess I could
have abstractly realized
that there is something very
paradoxical in that situation.
But in terms of the encounter
that I had with my grandmother,
it was completely natural.
Because number one, it was like
all her neuroses were gone.
It's like she acknowledged
them in some way
that that's how I used to be,
with a little bit of humor
in her eyes, but
also that that's
something she left behind.
And so it was just--
I was talking with my
grandmother, and she was dead.
And I was completely awake.
And another very
odd thing about it
was that when I
looked at her, she
looked like just
a physical person,
except that there was a
light just around her.
Not like a light that I
would experience here.
But it's very vibrant
energy emanation
and that in a way that
I can't very just--
I can't describe very well.
It was like she was
indented, right?
That she was pushed back
from the physical framework
in a way.
And that that's what I
was seeing as this energy
line and such that
in our conversations,
she revealed something to me
that I had not known about,
but makes perfect sense.
It really made my
life fit together.
I mean, there's no way
now of verifying this.
But I mean, I just woke up and,
whoa, yes, that must be true.
And so it happened
a couple of times
during this encounter that
unconsciously almost--
just like you would want
to go hug your grandmother.
Not everybody
likes to be hugged.
But my grandmother was a person
who-- hugging was OK with her.
But each time when
I would approach her
like this instinctively--
whereas throughout the rest
of this, she was very verbal.
When I would lean
forward to hug her,
she would throw her
hands up like this.
Stand back.
And instead of saying
something, would just
nod her head like that.
What does that mean?
I have no idea.
I don't know how to make
any inference about that.
I know that I was in a complete
state of conscious awareness.
I wasn't under the
influence of any kind
of extraneous compound.
So, yeah, I've had an apparition
of my grandmother, which
I'm still trying to process
almost 30 years later.
I have talked over the
years with hundreds
of people with apparitions of
the deceased to describe to me.
And I can't find any
common feature around them.
I mean, there's people
of every different kind
of personality types,
male and female.
There's any kind of
socio-economic group
you can think of.
And that people who haven't
had such experiences
are very anxious to push it
away or not think about it.
And again, I'm in a
situation where I just
can't understand why
some people don't
like to face the reality and
unknowableness of the world.
To me, it's just a
wonderful part of the world
that it's so mysterious,
and I can't figure it out.
And to me, that can't be
anything other than fear.
And the hundreds of
people I've talked with,
with apparitions
of the deceased--
there just aren't any common
factors that stand out.
These are people from
every walk of life,
and at every educational
level, and all kind
of equally astonished by what
happened to them and inspired.
And so I would be
really surprised
to say that there is some--
if somebody were
to find that there
is some unified feature of all
people who have apparitions.
It certainly is not
consonant with my experience.
I got to admit--
and it's something
I'm uncomfortable
about myself with,
but it's the way I
am, is that I probably
am too harsh on my assessment
of people who believe things
or think things, right?
And I know this is
unpleasant of me in a way.
But I can honestly
tell you, when
I first heard about these
things like hauntings
and so on, my attitude
was that, well,
this is a histrionic
person and so on.
Well, now-- had
a good friend who
spent much of his life
investigating hauntings.
And he was just a really
good, wonderful guy.
And in 1985--
I think it was
August of 1985, we
were at the American
Psychological Association
meeting in Washington.
And we were giving
presentations.
And so my friend Bill
said to me, well,
Raymond, I'm going
up to New Jersey
to investigate a haunting.
And he said, would you
come along to assist?
And I said, well, sure.
I'll be happy to.
And he said that his--
the way his method was that
I couldn't know anything
about the haunting before
I got there, right?
So we didn't discuss
it on the way up.
The routine was that I--
when we arrived at
the house, the family
would be gone to
another location,
and nobody else would be there.
And Bill would go to
the other location
and interview them about
the occurrences, OK?
And that my assignment
was to sit there
in the house and just record
anything that I thought of.
And so as God as my witness,
what happened was this presence
came through.
And it was not that I saw
anything with my eyes.
But I could describe this
as a visual experience.
But even though I knew it
wasn't coming through my eyes--
and I also knew it
wasn't imagination.
This is not imagination.
It was kind of electrical
for want of a better term.
And when this
person came through,
my sense was of an old man, OK?
And when this thing would
take steps, in my mind
not like it's an
auditory exactly,
but as a sort of halfway thing--
was like a whoom, whoom, whoom,
whoom, whoom.
And it went through like this,
like a semicircle around me
out-- up here.
Now, here is-- number
one, I am a chicken.
I am terrified of
a lot of stuff.
I wasn't one bit scared.
And maybe it was because I
was there as an investigator,
and I wasn't trying
to scare myself
with a haunted house story.
So then the next thing that
happened was this little girl.
I mean, I saw a very vivid
image of a little girl's face
about the age of 12, blond
hair, and a blue something.
Not a dress, but--
and it was like she was trying
to expel me or something,
like to push me out.
Now, a little time passed.
And then I heard what's coming
from upstairs like footsteps
on the upper floor.
And again-- I mean,
this sounds so out
of character for a chicken,
but I just went up there
and seeing nothing.
Nothing, OK?
Now, after a while,
Bill came home.
And let's put it this way.
The family situation was
totally different from what
I had imagined.
Number one, the woman
who owned the house--
her husband was a very eminent
neuroscientist whose work that
I had studied in
medical school--
number one.
Number two, the other
people in the family
were very distinguished
in their professions.
I probably shouldn't
be too revealing,
but just a very
distinguished artist, OK?
And then there were the--
now, we get to
talking about what
they had been experiencing.
And the experience was of
an old man and of a girl
about 12 years old,
that that's what they
had been seeing and hearing.
And there was a conflict
between these two.
Now, as the story unfolds, when
did these disturbances start?
They started a day after the
younger woman and the family
filed for a divorce.
Now, you see, I am not a
believer in paranormal things,
because I don't know
what belief means.
But I can describe
to you my experience
and swear to God that
that's what I experienced.
And then I hear from
other people who've
investigated similar things.
And I have no idea what this is.
But I can tell you that that
was my honest experience
that I went through.
And I should also say that the
disturbance between the older
man and the young
girl exactly reflected
the dynamics of
the family, which
had brought about the divorce.
Now, what in the name
of God is going on here?
It's like because
a psychiatrist--
really, I guess to
be a psychiatrist
and the whole sense
of the thing that you
have got to be taking
account not just of this one
level of reality, but of
other levels of reality
that we can hardly even imagine.
I would say that probably very
little in any of my education
really helps me understand
this haunting I experienced.
I suspect that there are
other layers of reality
that are sort of
interpenetrating
this one we're in.
And I'm beginning to see ways
where we could think logically
about what I would say would
be interdimensional transport
or like transition into
some other reality.
But it's-- I'm not there yet.
But I think I'm a lot
further than I was, say,
10 years ago or 20 years ago.
I can feel a progression
in this to the point
where I would have said 30 years
ago that the rational proof
of an afterlife is not
going to occur certainly
within my lifetime.
And that's probably still true.
However, I do feel that
there are new means
to think about this, so that a
rational proof of an afterlife
may be possible.
That's where I see this heading.
A scientific method is very--
it involves techniques
of verification,
and confirmation,
and disconfirmation
that we just don't have yet
with near-death experiences
and apparitions of the deceased.
Because we don't
have any clear way
to go from somebody's story
or narrative about something,
however impressive
that narrative
may be to us, to some sort
of definitive conclusion
about some other
dimension of reality.
But see, that's
where the action is,
is because if there
is life after death,
that means people go through
some interdimensional
transport, right?
That they go from one
state of existence
to some other
state of existence.
But nothing in our
logic right now
tells us how that
could be possible
or how we could talk about it.
But I think that that's
about to be solved.
I do.
One of the fundamental
institutions
in ancient Greek civilization
were called oracles of the dead
where people could travel.
And they could experience
vivid, lifelike apparitions
of their departed loved ones.
And this is very
important for the history
of Western philosophy.
Because at the time,
even of Socrates,
the average great
person thought that
what a philosopher was, was a
person who, number one, got out
of his body and flew into
the heavens or number two,
called up the
spirits of the dead.
And what this was all about
was these oracles of the dead.
And you could go there and--
take you through a technique
where you would actually
seem to see and converse
with your dead relatives.
And when I first read
about this was in 1962.
I was 18 years old, and I
read about it in "Herodotus."
And I remember thinking I was
so disappointed by Herodotus
because, how could
he fall for this?
This guy went and saw his
dead wife or whatever.
Well, then in about 1985,
I was reading an article
about the rediscovery and
excavation of the most famous
of the oracles of the
dead, the one that
was described in Homer's
"Odyssey," for example,
but also in "Herodotus."
And a lot of people
described this.
And what the
archaeologists found
was this vast underground
complex with dormitory rooms.
People would stay down there
apparently for four weeks.
There would be preparation.
You would be in
complete darkness.
They had a very specific diet.
And no doubt you would be
talking with the guides
about your dead relative.
And on the last
day, you would have
to go through a very narrow
little entrance, way down
a long corridor in
complete darkness,
and crawl down through
a space, and enter
into this room that was
maybe about 50, 60-feet long.
And in this room, they found the
remnants of an enormous bronze
cauldron.
And it was surrounded
by a sort of banister
that indicated when people saw
the visions of the deceased,
they were looking in the
direction of the cauldron.
And there were carbon marks
on this subterranean chamber,
indicating there
were torches there.
So it was torch light.
And as soon as I
read that detail,
I knew number one,
what they were doing,
but also number two,
that it would work.
By the way, I'm
not contradicting
the archaeologist.
Some years later, I
went and I met him.
And I described my
alternate take on it.
And I saw the aha.
I said, ah.
And then he gave me further
evidence that I was right.
But what this is all about--
when you gaze into what is
called an optical, clear depth,
it could be like a crystal ball.
It could be like a
body of clear water.
Or it could be a
polished bowl filled
with olive oil and water.
Or it could just be a mirror
arranged in such a way
that you don't see
reflections in it,
but nonetheless, that
it's illuminated.
And under those circumstances
when you gaze into this depth,
many people will see visions.
It's not like you have a
conscious control of it.
They just seem to appear.
And these are very lifelike.
They're full color.
They're dimensional.
They're very vivid.
So as soon as I
saw that detail, I
said, well, that's what it was.
So basically, I just set up
a mirror room in my home.
The mirror is mounted
on a wall in such a way
that it's above
the line of sight.
So the person sitting
below just looks up.
They don't see their
own reflection.
It's a darkened room.
And there's a
little light behind,
so that when the person
turns on the light
in this darkened room, the
room is diffusely illuminated.
And you can see the mirror,
but it's like a depth.
You don't see any reflections.
Now, the preparation
process is very simple.
I got 10 subjects who
were my graduate students
in psychology.
Most of them were older.
And they had been out
and had some experience.
And also, as word spread,
my medical colleagues
and psychologist colleagues
wanted to try it, too.
But my emphasis here
is this was curiosity.
What we were-- we
were just trying
to find out if this works.
Basically, this was the
technique I figured out.
I asked them-- each one.
I said, I want you to
choose one person who died
that you would like to see.
And then they would
come to my place
10 o'clock in the morning.
This would be one
on one all day.
And I would spend an hour or two
with them just basically saying
like, tell me about
this person who died.
What was this person like?
Then you just let them
talk as long as they will.
Then you come back with a
slightly less open-ended
question.
What are some of your
fondest memories?
Let them talk until they will.
Then, what are some of the
hang-ups in their relationship
that you regret and so on?
But the thing is just to talk
about the person who died.
And then I would escort
them into this little room.
And I would put
them in the chair.
And I would say just
get very relaxed,
and let all these feelings and
thoughts go through your mind,
and gaze away into the mirror.
And I would say, I'm
going to leave you in here
about an hour, hour and a half.
Say it very casually.
And if when I come back
something is going on,
you just shoo me away and
come out whenever you want.
And then when I would
go in and retrieve them,
then I would spend an
hour or two or more
afterward just like processing
what they went through.
And I set this up.
And my thought was, well,
if I do 50 of these,
I'll probably get 5 or so cases.
And I can write a little paper.
And I felt certainly that since
these were my psychologist
students or my
medical colleagues who
had studied about the mind,
that if anything happened,
they would say something like,
oh, yeah, I saw this image.
It looked like my grandma.
But was it real
or was it a fake?
I don't know.
That was what I expected.
Imagine my surprise when the
first person I put in there--
44 years old, a very
distinguished alcohol rehab
counselor, just a
very grounded person
came and prepared all day
to see her husband who
had died two years before.
But she came out of
there astonished.
And she said, well, I
didn't see my husband,
but my father showed up and
stepped out of the mirror.
She said the first thing
she saw was like in there--
but then her father came forward
and emerged from the mirror.
And so Randy was this
girl's name-- lady's name.
And so I said, well--
assuming that it
would be dreamlike.
But I was astonished
she said no.
This was really my father.
And that was the reaction
I got from everybody
I took through there, that
no matter how psychologically
informed they were, they
took this to be a real event.
So I did about 10 or 15.
And then I finally did-- well,
I'm going to try this myself,
thinking that
there's no way that I
would be fooled to think
that this is anything
other than a figment.
But I had this very vivid
experience with my grandmother.
I don't know what to make of it.
So it's astonishing to me
that this was so well known
to the Greeks, that it
was practiced continuously
for a period of at
least 1,500 years.
We don't know how long
it had been going on
before that we had the
records, but that it
was part of the
Western civilization,
that the early great
philosophers who founded
everything knew about this.
And some of them practiced it.
And then what
happened, I gather,
was that up to about 400
BC, this was well known.
But then there was
some church council
that came around
and struck this out,
but that it still has
manifested occasionally.
Occasionally, people
find out about it.
And I have no idea
what the ultimate role
of the mirror or the reflective
surface is, except maybe just
to alter one's
consciousness, to put one
into an altered state
of consciousness
where one is more
receptive to this.
But it doesn't necessarily
have to be a mirror.
There are other ways
of doing this as well.
One is known as the dream
incubation method, which
I know of this existing in
the 15th century in Europe,
because Paracelsus
describes this method.
But what it involves is that
you write a letter to your loved
one who died.
And you pour out your
feelings and your questions.
And then you fold it up, and
you put it under your mattress,
and you forget about it.
And in many cases, this brings
about these vivid visions
of the deceased
during the nighttime.
In the ancient world,
there was a culture
in North Africa that practiced
this in their funeral rituals.
Herodotus writes about them.
And when somebody in
the tribe would die,
they would create
a tomb for them.
But it would be a tomb with a
sleeping chamber at the top,
so that if you had an
issue with grandma,
then you would just go
out into the graveyard,
and you would
sleep on her grave.
And during the night,
as we can well imagine,
she would appear
to you and so on.
But psychologically,
it makes sense.
Grief, I think personally,
is probably the most pain
that anybody can experience.
So the natural thing
that people want
to happen when a
loved one died is
that they want to
see that person again
and to have a reunion.
And so in that
sense of the longing
for a contact with a loved
one makes perfect sense.
And then so therefore,
you can well
understand why the oracles
of the dead were so popular.
The archeology of
these sites show
that they were constantly
visited, because we just
have a great longing.
Mediumship and evocation
of the deceased
through mirrors and such are two
entirely different processes.
One, because the medium is by
definition a medium, right?
Like an intermediary,
whereas people
who have the psychomanteum
visits or mirror images--
it's their direct
personal experience.
Somebody may help them
get into that state.
But once they are
in that state, they
have their own
personal experience.
One of the things
that brings people
to me to go through these
evocations of the deceased
is grief.
However, there's a lot
more to it than that.
Because some people
who are grieving
would never even consider going
to some psychiatrist house
to sit in a room with a mirror.
So there are other things.
And I think that one
thing that motivates
people to come to me to
go through this procedure
is curiosity.
Like me, they are people
who are just driven to know.
What is this life all about?
I mean, it's so mystifying.
And some of our
fellow humans seem
to try to deal with this
by contracting and not
asking questions.
And I see that kind of person.
And I wonder, how
does that feel inside?
Because to me,
it's the curiosity
of such a driving force to me.
So I think that's one thing that
brings people to want to know
about apparitions and so on.
It's just curiosity.
What does happen to us when
we die, if anything at all?
Where I have come to this is
very far from the first idea
I had when I was a kid,
but really the same idea.
It's just the strangest thing.
Because long before I
got into the afterlife,
I knew that this world was
really strange and that
inexplicable.
And with no religious background
and just my only experiencing
of it being in my dance--
"New Yorker" magazine
cartoons with the angels.
And I just thought
it was a joke.
And then when I was
18, first finding out
that some people took
this question seriously
and going through
a process, where
it's totally counter-intuitive
to me to this day.
But here I am at 74.
And the closest thing I can
say to you is I give up.
Because when the doctors start
empathically co-participating
in their patients'
near-death experiences,
I'm past my pay grade on trying
to figure that out, right?
To me, it seems that
the best I can do
is to say, well, to my utter
astonishment there appears
to be a life after death.
And I'm still rebelling
against it when I say it.
Because, yeah, most people
seem to think-- or they say,
oh, everybody wants
there to be an afterlife.
I don't know whether I want
there to be an afterlife
or not.
And it's only when I got
to thinking about this
after I'd sort of made up my
mind that apparently there
is, it's not a very entirely--
an inviting or pleasant
prospect for me to think
that there is an afterlife.
Because I had gotten reconciled
and away from my background
to the idea of, yeah,
life is a time limited
experience, like a beginning,
and a middle, and an end.
And there is a certain
aesthetic appeal to that, see?
But now, because of things
like the doctors telling me
that they talked to their
patients' dead wives
in the operating
room, I give up.
I was on the wrong
track about that.
But now, I don't have any way
to put all this together yet.
It's just that it's--
I can stutter when
I say the words.
Apparently, there is
an afterlife and still
a big surprise to me.
It is.
[MUSIC PLAYING]